This is an interview with Dennis Ingram by John
Backus on November 26, 1988, at his home in Irving,
Texas, concerning the Vietnam War. In the
interest of accumulating knowledge about the
war, I'm going to donate this tape to the Texas A&M
Oral History Collection in the University
Archives. Is this all right with you? Yes. Could
you please give me your date and place of birth?
Wichita, Kansas, August 7, 1938. What was your
education before? I was a new graduate before
military. How and why did you join the service?
Well, I had made a couple of research things
on the 70th grade. I made a couple of research
things about underwater demolition. I decided
that's what I wanted to do, so I did
it. Can you give us a brief sketch of your military
career before Vietnam?
Well, when I first joined in 1957, I
was attached to a beachmaster unit in Coronado
Beach, California. That also happened to be the
same base that Underwater Demolition did their
training in. It was across the bay from San Diego.
My first year, I didn't do anything but play
football and basketball
and wrestle and baseball for the base unit. At the
end of the first year, I put in for unity training.
And then went through 20 weeks of training.
Got it done to what it was. I finished it out the last
three years in Unit
10. When did you go to Vietnam? Well, actually we
went to Vietnam off of what they call Westpac
Detachment.
In May of 1960, we went to what they call Westpac
Detachment, which was the Orient in Coronado
Beach, California. We actually went into
Vietnam, it would have been about November and
December of 1960.
We were the first 16 people in Vietnam. Which unit
were you with? That would have been the beginnings
of the SEAL units, the first 16 SEALs.
What's the difference between the UDTs and the
SEALs? They had UDTs back in World War II.
Well, it has grown to be what the difference is. The
SEALs will do more.
They will go through more extensive training on
top of the 20 weeks. They will go through jump
schools, free fall schools, language schools,
and survival schools that are even more extensive
than you had in UDT. They will also
do a wider variety of operations.
We usually operate mostly in and around water.
Seals will go inland, they'll go by air, they'll go
by land, they'll go by whatever is necessary.
Well, in Vietnam, what was the actual mission that
y'all had? Well, come to find out, once we got
there, the whole point was the 16 of us was to teach
and train these people in warfare. We met a select
group of people in this village. And they were from
all over South Vietnam. And they were there with
the purpose to be trained in the different facets
of warfare. Radios, to explosives, to
hand-to-hand, to weaponry, whatever. So y'all
were actually training South Vietnamese SEALs?
No. They were everything from Montiards to just
village people. But they were representatives of
all the different factions in South Vietnam at the
time. But after we got through training with them,
they would go back to their own detachments
and give them this training.
Did you have a particular specialty that you were
teaching? Yes, hand-to-hand
combat. So y'all were there strictly for
training? You didn't actually carry out any
combat missions of your own? Oh, when we got there,
we took them out. Eventually, we took them out to
teach us. We were ambushed. how to set up an
operation, how to control it, how to return from
it, things that you need to know to do these things,
and got involved in
a couple of bandages. So y'all were over there
before any of the conventional U.S. military
units were over there, just the only ones over
there at the time were just military advisors?
Matter of fact,
it was not supposed to be known. Matter of fact, it
wasn't known somewhere between three and five
years that anybody had been in there in 1960.
In 1960, they were still trying to get over the
French fighting in there, been in there for ten
years. So there was still some of that the residue
of the French conflict over there,
when we were there. How did the Vietnamese look at
y'all as imperialists? I mean, were y'all looked
at in the same frame of light as the French were?
No.
Of course, you know, when you're at the end of a
10-year cycle of fighting and conflict, you look
at those people considerably different than you
do at the new people coming in. Because the new
people coming in, you have a tendency to believe
and hope that they are going to do something to stop
the problem. We saw the same thing in Second World
War. They were all happy and delighted that
anybody was coming in to stop the Nazis. They
didn't care if it was Russia or America or who it
was. But they were excited. And then after that
group had been in there for a while, especially the
Russians, you saw this same angst in these people.
They would just as soon have them out of there as
well. I think the same thing is true when we went in.
You saw this attitude about the French. And, of
course, the communists, they were sick and tired
of that. So we held hope for them. But you saw this
insane attitude by the end of the American
combat there. They were fed up and sick of it, and
they were taking anybody's promise.
And it cost them. What did you think of the
abilities of the Vietnamese in this fight? When we
got there, it took us better than two weeks of
feeding these people, putting them through
conditioning. And I mean this was all of them that
were at that particular place for us. We had to feed
them and train them again and build them up for two
weeks. We had to feed them for two weeks. So they
would have the strength to do any of the things that
we were trying to show them. They couldn't carry
the materials. They couldn't do the combat. They
couldn't do the hand-to-hand. They couldn't do
any of these things when we first got there. They
were so beat down and so undernourished, I guess.
They were just not physically able. Now, they
could walk from here to the other side of the world.
They couldn't do anything as they were in that you
would be expected
to do, to fight. Where in South Vietnam were you all
located at? We went up a river. We didn't know where
we were either. We never even heard of Vietnam at
the time. They put us, all 16 of us, on a ship and took
us from Taiwan. We steamed. on a ship for a little
better than three days. Then they put us on a mic
boat off the ship. And we traveled for the better
part
of a day and a half up a river. It was around a
mountain
down in the valley. And we come to find out it was a
river below Da Nang that goes inland for maybe 100
miles. By the time we had circulated and done all we
needed to do, I suppose we'd probably have been
there 50, 60 miles.
It's a little river. Well, it's not a little river.
It's just below demand. It was supposed to be top
secret, but they knew we were coming. We didn't
know we were going. We didn't even know where we
were going when they told us to get our gear. They
changed ships.
Before we stepped onto the shore of this village,
they told us where we were. And to a man, not one of us
knew where we were. They didn't know what a Vietnam
was, never even heard of it. So you received no
special training for Vietnam specifically?
Well, we were chosen for our assignment based on
our abilities.
And it didn't take time to see what we needed. what
became a civil
unit. Like the guys who were specifically there to
run radios and communications, that's what their
training had been in the unit.
Guys in different facets were chosen out of the
whole West Pack attachment, out of our team, to
teach these things.
Do you think it would have been better if they had
maybe an isolated job to prepare y'all for
Vietnam, to give y'all some area orientation, or
to help y'all prepare for your classes? Because we
did what we were sent in to do, and that was to teach
these people. And by the time we left, it was only
nearly two months later, they were ready. So the
shortcomings of Vietnam weren't because the
people didn't know how to fight. A lot of it was
because we have
conventional-thinking military men at the top
who think that you're going to fight every war like
you fought the First and Second World Wars, and
that's the way you're going to fight this stuff.
They can't fight it that way. And it took them
forever, it seemed to me, to realize that. Plus the
fact that the guys that were sent over there long
after I was there couldn't quite grasp
what they were up against. Because some of the
people that you're working with side by side, day
after day, you don't realize, and you're not
conditioned to realize, that some of those people
are your enemy. And you won't know it until
somebody drops a hand grenade in your bed at night.
But that wears them. And there are a lot of things
that went sour over there. not the least of which is
our political problem over here.
While this is the greatest country in the world,
some of our freedoms are what costs us in these kind
of conflicts. And that's what makes them so
dangerous is that we have so many freedoms here
that we have a tendency or the people here that are
not doing the fighting have a tendency to get our
people who are fighting in big time trouble. So you
feel that the anti-war movement created a larger
problem later on? Well, I believe maybe contrary
to a lot of thought. Of course, I think a lot of
people think about anti-war when they think of
people like Jane Fonda. Jane Fonda is a blister on a
giant's fanny as far as I'm concerned. She was just
a minor nuisance. However, she cost a lot of people
lives. And I think we've got politicians who ought
to know better that cost a whole lot more lives than
Jane Fonnell ever now. So you think the problem
with the war wasn't with the military? I mean, the
problem with the actual outcome of the war wasn't
with the actual, not the anti-war movement, but
the civilian leadership? That's exactly. There
was no way you could cut it any other way. We went in
there
on a flyer.
It was fairly obvious. within a matter of a couple
of three years. We could have won if we had been in
there for the right reason. We weren't in there for
the right reasons. We were a holding action. The
problem with holding is that what you're holding
starts getting sticky. We keep pumping in bodies
and bringing them out in bags. And that does
something to your fighting spirit, especially
from the a guy that gets drafted right off of
college campus and said, all right, here's a gun,
go fight. And he doesn't have the slightest idea of
what he's doing over there. And out of stark
terror, we start getting involved in drugs and one
thing or another, graft and everything else. And
then the fighting spirit goes down the tubes.
And it was obvious. Have you read anything about it
at all or have you lived any part of it? But the
government was not going to allow you to go in there
to fight a war and win it. And we're not going to do
it. Now, for whatever reasons, and I don't profess
to know all the reasons, but I know enough to know
the reason we weren't going there, the reason we
couldn't get it done, because they didn't want to.
You'd have to ask them, why were we there in the
first place? And if they tell you that it was to stop
communism, then why did we stop it?
Why didn't we stop? Why haven't we stopped it
anywhere?
Unfortunately, the problem is the guys who
dictate that we go to war are not the guys we have to
fight for. And I can tell you how to stop it here. As
you make Congress and the Senate and all the
government people, you make them go first. Or at
least lead us in. And then they'll start finding
ways to stop this stuff. I mean, do it on both sides
of the conflict. You let the leaders get out there
and start showing us how to swing it.
The problem is we've got so much freedom here that
we can't grasp the countries who don't have it. And
we assume that they've got to play the same way we
do. And they don't.
And we're already at a disadvantage in that kind of
a war because of that.
We went in there with the idea, I assume, that we
were going to intimidate these people to being
good boys. Well, they'd already demonstrated
they were going to be good boys. For 10 years, they
fought the French. Of course, the French wanted to
own the country.
You're not going to intimidate
them that way. You're just not going to stop. And we
showed them. We demonstrated that pretty well.
We've got politicians that say they've got to go
over there and take a look and they're so full of
themselves that if you took them to a place that
they could see the truth they wouldn't recognize
it and they're going to come back and say and do
exactly what they wanted to do when they went over
there to take a look in the first place and that crud
still exists in our military problems today
You're the one that's
over there on the dirty end of the grunt stick.
You don't need some snot nose telling you what
you're fighting about. On your opinion, what do
you think should have been done differently to
come up with them to get a better outcome? for
somebody to determine what we're there about. And
then let the fighting man go do what he's there to
do. If you're there to establish something, get it
established. We could have done that. We had the
horsepower. We had the memory. We had it all.
But we were... stopped from going into Cambodia.
You're stopped from going across this parallel.
You're stopped from going across this river. Now,
they'd come over and kick the snot out of you, but
you couldn't chase them back across, and they had
sanction. And they knew it. Now, that means you're
fighting at a terrible disadvantage. Now, we did a
lot of things
that nobody's supposed to know we did. Now, it's
getting pretty shameful. that we put a name on such
a thing as war, and we're going to fight it by rules,
thinking that we're the gentlemen. You don't
fight a war by being gentlemen. That isn't what war
is about. If we can't establish what we're going in
for, then we ought to stay out. And if we're going
in, what do we want to accomplish? And once we've
determined those things, then let's go do it.
Because we can do it.
of the freedoms we have, everybody can say what he
wants to say, much as I'm saying
now. But the problem seems to be what a politician
says. He carries clout.
It's a costly
thing. I don't know that we ever knew, that the
government ever really knew what they wanted to
accomplish. If they went in there on a lark,
and then they got it on their hand and couldn't get
it off, couldn't lay it down. And everybody's
looking for a way to get out with honor. One way to
get off with honor is to kick somebody's fanny and
walk away. Or say, you know, I'm someplace I
shouldn't be and walk away. Apology will get it
just as fast as you You happen to kill somebody. No,
we're going to show our honor up to the point that
they demonstrate to us it's going to be costly. And
then we swallow our honor and our dead, and we still
walk away. That's political. It ain't got
anything to do with military. That's political.
Until we stop fighting wars based on what some
yo-yo in Washington, D.C. or a or Russia or whoever
decides we're going to fight it over.
Somebody's got to make a decision. Once you tell
the average military man what he's there to do, he
can carry out an assignment. But I don't know
anybody in business or military that can carry out
an assignment if you just tell him, Go over there
and fight. Go over there and hang out. Go over there
and do whatever. Somebody's got to be in charge.
And everybody, postures,
saber rattles.
They weren't the ones in the trenches. They
weren't the ones in the jungles. They weren't the
ones over there with footlots.
Did you feel we should have been there to begin
with? And if so, did you feel it could have been won?
Could we have won that on
the battlefield? Well,
at the time I was
there, I was sent in there to train somebody.
That's all I knew about it. I wouldn't have done my
job any differently had I known more about the
country than I did. Of course, at that time, nobody
had any concept that this thing would grow into
such a cesspool.
But could we have won it? We could have certainly
changed it. We could have secured it much as we did
the Korean situation.
even though America didn't exactly do a bang-up
job there, we at least divided the thing between
democracy and communism.
And as it is, we allowed an awful lot of instigators
to die. How should they fight it different? Should
they fight it as a counterinsurgency or bring in
the tanks? The biggest way to fight it differently
is you tell everybody in the entire area that there
are no boundaries we want to cross. You come over
here and toss something, and we're coming in after
you. It's like sending a hunting dog up a tree. You
don't just tree him. You go in after him. So I turn to
the dogs and say, you bring it out to me. You cross
our river or our boundaries or our whatever, then
you expect us to come back because we're coming in.
And we were so hamstrung over that very fact. And
they knew it. And they played our politics to the
hilt. And we never were allowed. Based on what?
They'll give you all these bull jive stories about
why we couldn't do these things. Why we'd bring
Cambodia in or we'd bring China in. They were
already in it. Who do you think we were fighting
over there? These weren't Montyards we were out
there swinging
at. So you supported it when Nixon invaded
Cambodia? Yes. You think they should have done
that sooner? Yes. Same with the mining of Haiphong
Harbor? B-52 strikes on Saigon. That's right. Or
rather, Hanoi. Hanoi, Saigon, Saigon,
Saigon. Yeah. Coaching in
the city that
we gave away. Anything you can do to establish in
the enemy's
mind that you're not quarantined as to what you're
going to do. They have to deal with the fact that
they, first, don't know what you might do. And
number two, know that you're not restricted from
doing anything. Now, that changes the complexion
of your enemy.
That's the reason Uniteen SEAL is effective. Tell
anybody we're going to have to fight a certain way.
Say we show up a certain place at a certain time.
You're just there all of a sudden. And that's the
reason that the most effective fighting groups in
Vietnam were the Rangers of the Marine Corps,
SEALs, UDT, the special units. Matter of fact, I
was talking to a guy this past week about, he was a
young fellow you just met, his dad. They assigned
him with...
paratroopers, and they jumped into this
particular place. You can fight that war over
there with a bunch of paratroopers. That isn't
that kind of war. You were involved in that, so you
know that, or you ought to know that. Where are you
going to jump?
But they jumped in, and it took them two weeks to
determine the fact that they jumped into
something they shouldn't have been into. That
isn't the way to fight that. The 193rd he was with?
The 193rd? Was that a brigade that jumped in at
Operation Junction City? I don't know. This must
have been in 1967, I think. Would that have been...
See, I don't know about their operations after I
was gone. I mean, they were involved in a lot of
things.
Conventional warfare is ridiculous to do like
that. Well, Special Forces was... doing similar
to what you were doing. They were training the
Montagnards
and watching the border men. Thought they should
have done more of that? Yes. Because I tell you,
almost every place that had that kind of a
situation, they were the most secure places in
that country.
You can't necessarily do that to Saigon. because
it's a humongous city,
but most businesses are saying
that you can only go so far.
You only fight a certain one. Who establishes
that? It shouldn't be somebody over here doing it.
So it should have been mainly left up to the special
warfare units?
There's always room and there's always a
necessity for numbers. And you can't possibly
have enough numbers
in special units. Not that many of us.
But you're going to accomplish a whole lot more
doing it quietly than you are coming in there. I
think the first detachment that we really became
aware of was 50,000 men went in there. Well,
50,000, I remember, you know, even 1962, I think it
was, or late 61. I mean, this was a year and a half,
two years later. And I was thinking, 50,000,
everyone there, 50,000 people weighed through
that entire country. Hold on. The first combat
troops were the Marines landed in 1965. So up until
then, it was just still nothing but military
advisors. Yeah, it was just, of course, we're
doing that same type of thing around the world.
They need it. I don't deny that a bit. I mean, these
people obviously need it if they want to sit there
and fight. But the point was is they were training
them to fight their war and us stay out. But
invariably, we get drawn into this stuff. And
invariably, our military, time after time, is
hamstrung before we ever get in there. And it's
done not because of the military. It's done
because of the politicians. My feeling here, and
has been and probably will remain, the next fight
we get into, we ought to send every politician from
the state level up. You think we ought to be? You go.
Don't send your son. You go.
The same thing is required of any other nation that
we get into. You send your old cannon mouths out
here, and you guys duke it out. If you can't settle
it, then us young folks, you know, those that are
left like you, you go fight.
to rattle all the
politicians. Are you familiar with, speaking of
how the SEALs were involved, are you familiar at
all with the Phoenix Project? No. The work that the
SEALs were doing with them? No. Phoenix? That was
later on. Just if you didn't hear it. Last time
they came dragging me away was about 1964 or 5. You
were already out by then? Yeah, I got out in
61. See, 61, I got out in August. It was October of
61. The Cuban Missile Crisis
cracked. I followed it back here.
What did you think about the fighting ability of
the North Vietnam user that you read at comm? Or did
you not see enough of that? Well, I know
enough about them. I guess the biggest difference
is, and again, it goes back to our freedoms, the
difference in their fighting people and our
fighting people We know what it is to do what we
please. They only know to do what they're told to
do. They're raised that way. So they will take
hardship much longer than we will without
revolting.
Military, what makes the United States so good in
military deals is their individuality. That is
the hardest thing for an Asian mind to grasp, is how
we can be almost, or at least appear to be, so
undisciplined that they don't know what to do with
it. So we had all these people over there with that
mindset that could have made a grand difference.
Why we didn't, You'd have to talk to people who were
doing the directing.
Those people in that part of the country
have lived almost on some semblance of a contract.
And they also
have this religion. They
believe that
it's to their advantage to die for their country.
That they will be reincarnated and live a better
life. All these things after death. So if you were
raised all your life
having little, little wouldn't be that big a deal
for me to go there. That's what makes them tough.
for an American to fight. And these people lived in
caves and out in the open and just things that the
average American would shudder to consider. And
the Japs did the same thing in Okinawa and all the
islands. They got into the caves and they dug
trenches and they dug holes in the ground and lived
in it.
They're
tough people. Probably
the toughest in the whole bunch is coal rangers.
Rocks. They terrified everybody. Every village
they ever walked into, they terrified everybody.
Tough folks, good folks.
What was your opinion of the military leadership?
Not
the civilians, but the military. I think they were
more concerned about their own political
ambitions than they were in leading our people. If
they'd won, they'd have told some of these
political leaders to kiss
off. If some of those military people had done what
their conscience told them to do, they'd have told
the military leader political leadership, you
either put us in and turn us loose or you get us out.
So you think it was up to this Joint Chiefs of Staff
to either convince the President not to go into
Vietnam or to be prepared to resign and protest?
In good conscience,
yes. Military leadership is responsible. to the
President of the United States. But a good leader
is also responsible to and for his men.
It's rather disheartening. You just have to
believe that it had been terribly disheartening
to think that you had a general that was telling you
to get up and fight a windmill,
as these guys were asked to do, with no weapon at
all. Tie their hands behind them.
They had to know if they had any intelligence at
all. And they said that we were loaded with
intelligence.
They had to know long before we ever got out of there
that we needed to be out of there. Or we needed to be
in there doing something entirely different than
we were doing.
And it turns out that so many of those military
leaders
became political
leaders. Too many officers were just out there
trying to get their
ticket punched. I guess that's the way it would
prove out. It seems like the officers that were
there for other reasons led their men and led them
well. There isn't any substitute for having an
officer that wants to get a job done and will do it at
all costs, but not expose his entire command just
for his benefit. That's a man that's concerned
about two things, getting a job done or not.
So I don't just sit around and talk about it. Make up
numbers. Force their people under to literally
lie to support their position. I've seen a couple
of trials over that.
Always crap running downhill. It's always the guy
down line that's really going to get it splashed on
them.
Chief joins his staff, I think, just in their own,
just in the terminology, tells
you these people are political. If we're going to
continue to fight political wars, the
politicians ought to be the ones
Going back to your actual operations that you were
involved in, did you feel that the actual training
that you were conducting was successful?
Yeah.
By the time we got finished,
they were in control of all our people.
Each had a good grasp
of the fundamentals.
each of the areas.
And they were prepared to go back and teach their
own commands of people. These things. And then
after we left, sometime later, for the next four
years, I suppose, there were people who followed
us in there. Which means that they continued to do
more and more of the same thing that we had started.
The problem with those folks is that they were
restricted by the same politicians that
restricted the Americans.
For every captain, you had a Captain Harvey. For
every lieutenant, for every sergeant, for every
so on, you had a complimentary ticket there. But
they're all restricted by that same command.
And since we held the biggest stake,
our politicians overrode their politicians. Now
even though you were in their country, and even
though you were
supposed to be there to observe and teach, their
commanders were the ones who were supposed to be
running the operations. But for years, they
didn't have the ability. They didn't have
wherewithal to go out and lead their people. They
didn't have the horsepower to do it.
Well, I think basically they had the knowledge and
they had the training to get it done. But they were
restricted by the same thing
we were. I don't care if it was their country or not.
Our
government ran it. Do you feel that, at the Gulf of
Tonkin, Johnson maybe should have requested
declaration of war and then had a draft or called
the National Guard. I'm glad he did.
He had to have declared
war. It might have changed the complexion of
everything. At least when we say, OK, it's war. We
have a tendency then to go on and fight it. But when
we tell the American people that it's a police
action, and Korea was never called a war. It was a
police action. We had the opportunity to change
that thing and to end it. Because of vacillation,
we ended up getting our fanny kicked.
and you've declared war at that time and made a
mindset that we were going to do something about
it, I believe it would have changed the
complexion. At least it would have changed a lot of
the direction, maybe.
And that's really the reason I'm saying that the
politicians created the monster. And I don't
think any of them did it. I
don't think any of them had a mind to create such a
problem. I think most of them acted with good
conscience.
But the majority of the politicians that even are
in office today have not fought, ever fought.
They've always been politicians.
The vice president-elect, what did he do? He's old
enough to have been. What did he do during that
period of time? Now here he is, he's going to be in
charge? At least the president-elect knows what
it is to go fight.
We've got entirely too much of that in this
country. How they got to be what they are is because
they're politicians. with the American people.
We keep electing guys that
talk a good fight but have never fought a fight.
And if we're going to go around and do the busy work
of the world, then we better have warriors in
charge. At least they know what it is to get their
nose bloodied. And I don't want some powder puff
ever again telling me who I ought to duke it out
with. I'll fight for this country, and I'll do
whatever's necessary for this country. But I
won't do it because some little snot nose that had
his pampers changed all the way through college
tells me to go do it.
First place, his grasp of what's going on around
him isn't too great. His grasp of what's going on
around me is absolutely absurd.
Yeah, but Johnson would have declared the war. If
he had declared it a war, America would have been
in, good, bad, or whatever. At least the direction
would have been determined, as it was. And as it
turned out, we never had direction. It was whoever
was talking the loudest. And the people, I
believe, who were war protesters... were
protesting not necessarily about war as they were
about the direction things were going in our boys
and people and guys who were protesting for
instance they were protesting because they were
either going to have to go or some of their friends
and brothers